Hello, hello hello, and welcome
to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today it
is part three of our three-part
mini-series on European dictators.
In part one it was the
Grey Blur, Joseph Stalin.
In part two, it was Il
Duce, Benito Mussolini.
And in part three, well you
could probably guess, it is
the most infamous of them all.
The man most synonymous with
fascism, and the fascist with the
most warped of all the worldviews.
A man who almost conquered Europe, and
whose genocidal rage left millions dead.
The Führer - Adolf Hitler, a man
whose name alone is enough to send
shudders down the spines of hundreds
of millions of people around the world.
Now, obviously it would be incredibly
difficult to give a thorough account of
Hitler’s entire life, and it certainly
wouldn't be possible in this episode.
So today, I'm not going to be going
into detail with a blow-by-blow
account of the Second World War,
or the horrors of the Holocaust.
I’ll give a broad overview of Hitler,
focusing on his rise and the key events
in his life, but also some insight
into the lesser known stuff - who
Hitler really was as a man, and some
of the more unusual things about him.
OK then, let’s get right into
it and talk about Adolf Hitler.
On the 30th of April, 1945, the
Third Reich was in its final hours.
Gunfire and explosions filled the air.
Berlin was burning, the
streets a battlezone.
Waves of Soviet Red Army
soldiers poured into the city.
But they weren't hoping just to deliver
the decisive blow and finally end the
war that had destroyed Europe for five
years - they were looking for someone.
Nazi Germany’s leader, the Führer, Adolf
Hitler, hid in a secret underground bunker
16 metres beneath the German chancellery.
The Führerbunker, as
it was known in German.
Actually, it wasn’t a bunker so much
as it was a complex that contained 18
rooms and was fully self-sufficient,
with its own water and electrical supply.
As the Soviets advanced through
Berlin street by street, getting
closer to the Führerbunker, Hitler
continued to give orders and hold
meetings with high-ranking Nazis.
The day before, on April the 29th, he
had married his long-time mistress,
Eva Braun, and put together his will
and political testament outlining who
he wanted to take over when he died.
But when, and how, would that be?
Was he sure that the Soviets would
capture, and likely torture and kill him?
Or was it the news of his ally
Benito Mussolini’s gruesome
death just hours before that
convinced him to do something else?
After putting his affairs in order,
on the afternoon of the 30th, Hitler
enjoyed his last lunch, shook hands with
his staff, and retired to his private
quarters of the complex with Eva Braun.
Sometime that afternoon, Adolf Hitler,
the man who destroyed mainland Europe
and organised the slaughter of millions
of Jews, sat down on his sofa with his
new wife and swallowed a cyanide capsule.
To make sure, he shot himself in the head.
The Führer was dead.
As the Red Army closed in, Hitler
and Braun’s bodies were quickly
cremated, or burned, in the garden.
And just eight days later, on the 8th
of May, 1945, the Germans surrendered.
Much like the subjects of part
one and two of this mini-series,
it didn’t have to be this way.
Adolf Hitler was born on the 20th
of April, 1889, in Braunau am Inn, a
small town in modern day Austria, then
part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire.
He was the fourth of six children born
to Alois Hitler and Klara Pölzl, though
three of his siblings died in infancy.
Both his parents came from poor
peasant backgrounds, but by the
time they were married and had
started a family, they lived a
comfortable middle class existence.
His father Alois was a customs official,
a civil servant, and his mother,
Klara, a housewife and devout Catholic.
His father was said to be harsh and
distant with the children, but his
mother was more loving towards them.
When Hitler was just three years old,
the family moved to Passau, in Germany,
and it is thought that Hitler picked up
his distinctive Bavarian dialect there.
The family returned to Austria in
1894, and Hitler attended Volksschule,
a state-funded primary school.
Though the young Hitler was clearly
able, or intelligent, he showed
little interest in education and left
school with a poor academic record.
He had a tense, difficult,
relationship with his father,
who wanted him to follow in his
footsteps and become a civil servant.
In fact, Alois Hitler was a violent man
who beat his children, and Hitler’s mother
often intervened to try and protect them.
In 1900 his younger brother Edmund
died from measles, and his brother, the
11-year-old Adolf, became an increasingly
quiet, detached boy who got into
conflicts with his father and teachers.
But when his father died suddenly on
the 3rd of January in 1903, when Hitler
was 13 years old, his mother allowed
him to change schools and forget
about a career in the civil service.
The young Hitler was able to study
what he really wanted to, art, and
he moved to art school and began to
think of himself as a bit of an artist.
In 1907, when he was 18 years old, he
moved to Vienna, filled with dreams
of winning a place at the Vienna
Academy of Art, but he was rejected.
Traditionally, historical accounts
of Hitler’s time in Vienna depict him
as a struggling artist with no income
that moved from hostel to hostel.
But the truth wasn’t
quite as simple as that.
After all, his father had been a civil
servant, he came from a middle-class
family, and so he was by no means poor.
It’s thought that he blew through, he
got through, quite a large inheritance
while he tried to make it as an artist.
By the end of 1909, however, he
was genuinely running out of money.
He sold postcards and drawings to survive,
but even then, one of his aunts introduced
him to a wealthy business partner and
he was paid to paint watercolour scenes.
Now, believe it or not, one of Hitler’s
watercolours sold for €130,000 at an
auction in Nuremberg back in 2014.
The price tag, it has to be said, comes
from the subsequent reputation of the
man who held the paintbrush rather than
the artistic quality of the canvas.
And back in Vienna his paintings
weren’t worth quite that much,
but the watercolours earned Hitler
enough money to live, to survive.
Like many young Austrians at the time,
Hitler identified strongly with a sense
of German identity and he likely shared
the “casual” anti-semitism that was
common to middle-class German nationalism.
However, Hitler probably had business
and personal relationships with Jews
in Vienna, and his anti-semitism in
those early days was likely a reflection
of the general anti-semitism common
in society at the time - that is to
say, still completely unacceptable by
any standards, but nothing like the
genocidal anti-semitic ideology he
developed after the First World War.
And in 1913 he moved to Munich, in
southern Germany, to avoid military
service for the Habsburg Empire.
This was made possible due to another
inheritance from his father’s estate, and
in Munich Hitler’s life largely continued
as it had in Vienna - drifting around,
surviving on paintings and postcards.
That is, of course, until the following
year, 1914, when world events changed
not only Hitler’s life but the
direction of European history forever.
When the First World War began,
Hitler volunteered for service
in the German army and joined the
16th Bavarian Infantry Regiment.
He served as a runner on the Western
Front - a particularly dangerous job
that involved passing messages between
different army units on the front
line - and he was awarded an Iron Cross.
At the time of the armistice, when
the First World War officially ended,
Hitler was in hospital with temporary
blindness caused by a British gas attack.
Keen to stay in the army even after
the war had ended, Hitler joined the
Intelligence and Propaganda section
where he had his first political
training, and became an army informer,
spying on smaller political parties.
He made speeches to the troops
championing German nationalism and
anti-Socialism, and developed his
oratory, his public speaking, skills.
In 1919 he also joined the German
Workers’ Party, a far-right,
anti-semitic, anti-communist organisation.
When he left the army in 1920, he took
over the publicity and propaganda for the
German Workers’ Party and he changed the
party’s name to the National Socialist
German Workers Party - Nazi for short.
A year later, in 1921, he challenged Anton
Drexler for the leadership of the Nazi
party, and eventually Drexler agreed.
A couple of years later, on the 8th
of November 1923, Hitler and the Nazis
attempted to overthrow the Bavarian
government in a coup d'état that
became known as the Beer Hall Putsch.
After being inspired by Benito Mussolini’s
‘March on Rome’ the year before, Hitler
and 2,000 Nazis marched through Munich
to the Beer Hall, determind to take
over a meeting chaired by important
figures in Bavarian politics and
ultimately to overthrow the government.
However, unlike Mussolini, who was one
of his early political heroes and the
man many consider to be the father of
fascism, Hitler’s coup didn’t work.
The next day as Nazis marched in
the streets, police open fire.
Hitler managed to escape but was captured
and served 9 months in Landsberg prison.
Now, while in prison, he wrote
his famous autobiographical
book of political ideology, Mein
Kampf - or my struggle, in English.
But what many people don’t know is
that Hitler didn’t actually write
the book himself, or at least he
wasn’t sitting down at a desk writing
it down on endless sheets of paper.
Rather, he paced around his cell
and dictated it - meaning, he said
it out loud - to Rudolf Hess, the
man who would later rise the Nazi
ranks to become the Deputy Führer.
As you probably know, in Mein Kampf Hitler
expanded on, or explained, his twisted
theories on race and ethnic “purity”
- that there was a racial hierarchy and
the so-called “Aryan race” was superior.
In order for the Aryan race to fulfil
its destiny, Hitler’s logic went, they
would need Lebensraum [or living space].
Germany must, he wrote, invade the
land to the east occupied by the
“inferior” Slavic peoples including the
Sudetenland [or the Czech Republic as
it’s now called], Poland and Russia.
By the time Hitler was released from
prison, the German economy had picked
up, or improved a little, after a
period of terrible economic growth
and hyperinflation, and support
for more extreme right-wing groups
like the Nazis began to die down.
As Germans began to trust the
Weimar Republic again, Hitler got
to work reorganising the Nazi Party.
In 1925 he established the Hitler Youth
to organise youngsters, and created
the Schutzstaffel - known as the SS,
his own paramilitary organisation.
Members of the SS wore black uniforms
- which was likely inspired by Mussolini’s
blackshirts - and they swore a
personal oath of loyalty to Hitler.
Over the next couple of years the Nazi
party was banned several times, but
continued to ramp up, to increase its
anti-semitic and anti-communist rhetoric.
After the failed Beer Hall Putsch, the
Nazi party would, Hitler promised, win
power through democratic means, and in the
late-1920s the Nazi party began building
up its propaganda machine and tried to
establish a base in northern Germany.
Now, it’s around this time that things
start to get a little strange in
Hitler’s personal life, and there’s
even a hint of murder mystery.
In 1928, Hitler’s half-sister,
Angela Raubal, and her daughter
Geli, moved into Hitler's home.
Hitler, who was 19 years older than
his half-niece, developed something of
an obsessive relationship with Geli.
He was so obsessive that historians have
debated for decades, and it has been
strongly implied, or suggested, that
their relationship was a romantic one.
Whatever the truth, historians
have described Geli as “the only
true deep love affair of his life.”
And as if that wasn’t strange
enough, Hitler’s obsessiveness had
tragic, and deadly consequences.
On the 18th of September, 1931,
at the age of 23, Geli was
found dead in the apartment she
shared with Hitler in Munich.
By her side was Hitler’s pistol.
But what had happened?
Well, the official version of events
was that Hitler and Geli had argued
over her plans to go to Vienna, and
that after Hitler had refused to let
her leave, she committed suicide.
But it’s a little more
mysterious than that.
At the time, the Munich press reported
that Geli’s nose was shattered, and
that she had other injuries to her body.
Had he killed the young girl?
Now, we must remember that in 1931 Hitler
was on the cusp of political power.
The 1929 Wall St.
Crash had plunged the Weimar economy back
into crisis, and the political landscape
was ripe, it was ready, for extreme views.
Hitler wanted to take advantage of this,
and a murder scandal would have likely
ruined his career and rise to power.
In fact, we now know that Nazi officials
even discussed a replacement for Hitler,
should the scandal get out of hand.
So it’s little surprise, therefore,
that the Nazi party pressued
the public prosecutor not to
investigate, and that Geli’s body
was given a very quick post-mortem.
The incident was quickly ruled
suicide, and Geli’s body was taken
down the back stairs of the police
station and taken to Vienna to be
buried before the press even got wind
of it, before they heard the news.
Very mysterious indeed - and one can’t
help but wonder how different Hitler’s
career and German and European history
would have been if there had been a proper
investigation into Geli Raubal’s death.
Now, regardless of what happened, the
incident sent Hitler into a depression
so bad that one historian believes
that “With the exception of his
mother’s death… no other event in his
personal life had hit him so hard.”
Clearly, it’s hard to have any compassion
for the man, when one knows what he would
go on to do, and this event wouldn’t have
any effect on his political career, as his
Nazi party continued its rise to power.
Around a year before Geli’s death,
in September of 1930, the Nazi party
had enjoyed large electoral gains and
increased its number of representatives
in parliament from 14 to 107, making
Hitler the leader of the second
biggest political party in Germany.
In 1932 Hitler came second in the
presidential elections, and the
Nazis were firmly established in the
political mainstream - benefitting
from political instability and another
spike, or increase, in unemployment.
In July of that year the Nazis became the
largest party in the Reichstag, and after
political negotiating and maneuvering
throughout the rest of 1932, Hitler
emerged as Chancellor in January of 1933.
The Nazis now had a third of the seats
in the Reichstag, and with more elections
coming up in Feburary of 1933, the
German Reichstag was destroyed by a fire.
Now, historians are almost certain that
the Nazis organised the blaze, but the
fire allowed them to blame the Communists
and tighten their grip on power.
And Hitler wasted no time.
The Enabling Act, which was passed in
March 1933, effectively made Hitler
a dictator, and all other political
parties and trade unions were banned.
Adolf Hitler, the shy Austrian
boy who painted watercolours,
had risen to the very top of
German politics and stolen power.
And he had ambitious, deadly plans.
Now, clearly the 1930s and lead up
to the Second World War was a period
of intense activity, far too much
to do justice to here, so we are
going to skip over the key events.
Instead, we’ll deal with a couple
of interesting points about
Hitler the man from this period.
One is an assassination attempt, and the
other a theory about Hitler’s drug use.
The most important thing to underline
about Hitler’s foreign policy during
the 1930s was that he was immediately
on a war footing - that is to say,
he was preparing Germany for war.
In October of 1933 Hitler withdrew
Germany from the League of Nations
and cast aside, or ignored, the
restrictions placed on the German
military by the Treaty of Versailles
and he tripled the size of the army.
In June of 1934, he further tightened his
grip on the Nazi party and eliminated his
remaining enemies with a move that became
known as the Night of the Long Knives.
In 1935 he began rearming Germany and
military conscription was introduced.
Hitler, it became clear to everyone
across Europe, was ready for war.
Domestically, he was also setting the
wheels in motion for his mass-persecution
of Jews, homosexuals, Roma, and
anyone who didn’t fit into his idea
of the perfect “Aryan” society.
In November of 1938, the infamous
Kristallnacht took place across Germany.
Jewish shops and synagogues were burnt
down, and 30,000 Jewish men were rounded
up and taken to concentration camps.
This was just the start of what would
have become known as the the Holocaust,
which is clearly far too important
a subject to try to do justice to
in a short section of this episode.
Internationally, he was itching for war.
Despite signing agreements not
to, he sent his army abroad.
Nazi forces occupied part
of modern day Czech Republic
called the Sudetenland, in 1938.
And then in September 1939 Germany
invaded Poland, which resulted in
a full declaration of war between
the UK and France on Germany.
The Nazis went on to occupy Denmark,
Norway, Holland, Belgium, France,
Romania and Yugoslavia, and in 1941
they invaded Russia - a mistake that
would prove to be the beginning of
the end for the Nazis, and Hitler.
Now, as we heard in part one, on Stalin,
after sacrificing as many as a million men
at the Battle of Stalingrad, the Soviets
pushed the Germans all the way back to
Berlin and the Führerbunker in 1945.
Now, the details of the war and the
Holocaust are well-known, but I want
to touch on two elements of life
within Hitler’s personal circle.
As Hitler’s genocidal rage wreaked havoc
across Europe, killing millions and
slaughtering Jews, some in the Nazi party
thoughts things - and Hitler specifically
- were getting a bit out of control.
That’s why, in July of 1944, a German
Army officer named Claus Von Stauffenberg
placed a bomb in a briefcase under a
table in Hitler’s headquarters, with the
aim of blowing the man to smithereens.
During a meeting between Hitler and
top Nazis, the bomb exploded, killing
one person, but Hitler survived.
As you might expect, Hitler purged
the party of anyone even remotely
suspected of being involved.
Though the assassination attempt, which
became known as Operation Valkyrie,
wasn’t successful, it highlights the
fact that there were those in the Nazi
party that felt Hitler had lost control.
Now, why might that be?
Well, the obvious answer is that
he was clearly a brutal genocidal
maniac, but in recent years another
interesting theory about Hitler has
emerged, and it concerns his drug use.
Was the Führer a drug addict?
In autumn of 1941 as the war began to turn
against the Nazis, Hitler had fallen ill.
He was so ill, in fact, that he couldn't
go to a military briefing - this
was something that never happened.
That day, his doctor gave
him an opiate and a hormone
injection for the first time.
Unsurprisingly, Hitler felt much better
and he was able to attend the briefing.
And he was very impressed by
this magical recovery drug, which
was an opiate called Dolantin.
From then on, Hitler asked his doctor
for more and more of it, and between
1941 and the winter of 1944 Hitler's
drug abuse increased massively,
with him reportedly relying on a
cocktail of opiates and cocaine.
His dependence got so bad, in fact, that
he developed a severe tremor, or shake.
You can actually see this if you look at
footage of Hitler in the latter stages of
the war, where his hands and entire body
are shaking so violently that even the
Nazi propaganda machine couldn’t hide it.
Some historians believe that Hitler
could have been suffering from
Parkinson's disease, but severe tremors
are also a symptom of drug withdrawal.
We already know that some Nazis felt
Hitler was out of control, but was
this partly down to drug addiction?
Was he making war decisions while
high on cocaine and opiates?
It’s certainly an interesting theory,
and could partly explain Hitler’s
manic behaviour and refusal to stop the
war until the last moment, preferring
to destroy Europe than make peace.
There are clearly many other reasons
for his behaviour and downfall, and
one that I should mention is his
extreme paranoia and his refusal to
trust his generals to make military
decisions without consulting him first.
When you are fighting literally a world
war, you can’t do everything yourself, and
this is believed to be a major reason why
the German army was eventually defeated.
So, all of this takes us
back to Berlin, in 1945.
In January the Soviets began
their assault on Germany, and
by April they reached Berlin.
As we know from the start of this
episode, Hitler stayed in the
Führerbunker until the very end.
After hearing of Mussolini’s
gruesome end, with the Soviets
just streets away, Hitler committed
suicide on the 30th of April, 1945.
Adolf Hitler, the man whose name has
become synonymous with evil, was dead.
Unlike the subjects of parts one
and two of this mini-series, Stalin
and Mussolini, the death of Hitler
offered more of a clean break with
the past, an acknowledgment of the
horrors that had been committed under
his command, and a shared resolve
to never allow them to happen again.
Clearly, as with any warped belief, there
are still those who look back on this
man’s life with some form of admiration,
but for the vast majority of mankind, the
life of Adolf Hitler is looked back on
with utter repulsion, hate and disgust.
He is a man who organised the industrial
slaughter of at least six million
Jews, oversaw the deaths of millions of
soldiers and civilians across Europe,
and left a deep scar on world history.
It is a truly vile legacy indeed.
Ok then, that is it for today’s episode on
Adolf Hitler, and with that comes the end
of our mini-series on European dictators.
I hope it was an interesting one,
and whether you knew a lot about
Hitler, Stalin or Mussolini, or
this was the first time you’d really
dived into their backstories, well
I hope you learned something new
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
What particular set of circumstances
allowed Hitler to come to power?
Do you think a Hitler-like figure
could ever come to power again?
Of the three dictators we’ve discussed
in our mini-series, who would you say
was the ‘worst’ or most consequential?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.